

Brännmark2013 - Insulin signalling in human adipocytes (diabetic condition)

The paper describes insulin signalling in human adipocytes under normal and
diabetic states using mathematical models based on experimental data. This
model corresponds to insulin signalling under diabetic condtion

This model is described in the article:

[Insulin Signaling in Type 2 Diabetes: EXPERIMENTAL AND MODELING ANALYSES
REVEAL MECHANISMS OF INSULIN RESISTANCE IN HUMAN
ADIPOCYTES.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/23400783)

Brännmark C, Nyman E, Fagerholm S, Bergenholm L, Ekstrand EM, Cedersund G,
Strålfors P.

J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 5;288(14):9867-80.

Abstract:

Type 2 diabetes originates in an expanding adipose tissue that for unknown
reasons becomes insulin resistant. Insulin resistance reflects impairments in
insulin signaling, but mechanisms involved are unclear because current
research is fragmented. We report a systems level mechanistic understanding of
insulin resistance, using systems wide and internally consistent data from
human adipocytes. Based on quantitative steady-state and dynamic time course
data on signaling intermediaries, normally and in diabetes, we developed a
dynamic mathematical model of insulin signaling. The model structure and
parameters are identical in the normal and diabetic states of the model,
except for three parameters that change in diabetes: (i) reduced concentration
of insulin receptor, (ii) reduced concentration of insulin-regulated glucose
transporter GLUT4, and (iii) changed feedback from mammalian target of
rapamycin in complex with raptor (mTORC1). Modeling reveals that at the core
of insulin resistance in human adipocytes is attenuation of a positive
feedback from mTORC1 to the insulin receptor substrate-1, which explains
reduced sensitivity and signal strength throughout the signaling network.
Model simulations with inhibition of mTORC1 are comparable with experimental
data on inhibition of mTORC1 using rapamycin in human adipocytes. We
demonstrate the potential of the model for identification of drug targets,
e.g. increasing the feedback restores insulin signaling, both at the cellular
level and, using a multilevel model, at the whole body level. Our findings
suggest that insulin resistance in an expanded adipose tissue results from
cell growth restriction to prevent cell necrosis.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1304160000](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1304160000) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

